README.md, before:

# InstrumentAllTheThings

Welcome to your new gem! In this directory, you'll find the files you need to be able to package up your Ruby library into a gem. Put your Ruby code in the file `lib/instrument_all_the_things`. To experiment with that code, run `bin/console` for an interactive prompt.

TODO: Delete this and the text above, and describe your gem

## Installation

Add this line to your application's Gemfile:

```ruby
gem 'instrument_all_the_things'
```

And then execute:

    $ bundle

Or install it yourself as:

    $ gem install instrument_all_the_things

## Usage

### Configuration
Two ENV variables are required to connect InstrumentAllTheThings with DataDog.

1. `DATADOG_HOST` - defaults to localhost
2. `DATADOG_PORT` - defaults to 8125

### Usage in application code
Within your application code, the `InstrumentAllTheThings::HelperMethods` moddule
can be included to provide some helper methods.

```ruby
class SomeClass
  include InstrumentAllTheThings::HelperMethods
end
```

### Instrumentation Helpers
The helpers provided by the HelperMethods module

#### with_tags(*tags, options = {}, &blk)
Any instrumentation method with that block will have those tags appended to it.

Options:
* `except` - an array of strings or regex of active tags to remove from the active tag list

__Example__
```ruby
InstrumentAllTheThings.active_tags += ['foo:bar']

class Foo
  include InstrumentAllTheThings::HelperMethods

  def foo
    with_tags('omg:wassup', 'dude:car?') do
      # Tags are now foo:bar, omg:wassup, dude:car?
      with_tags('baz:nitch', except: [/\Adude:.*/]) do
        # Tags are now foo:bar, omg:wassup, baz:nitch
        with_tags(except: [/\Aomg:.*/]) do
          # Tags are now foo:bar, baz:nitch
        end
        # Tags are back to foo:bar, omg:wassup, baz:nitch
      end
      # Tags are now back to foo:bar, omg:wassup, dude:car?
    end
  end
end
```

#### increment(stat, options = {})
Wrapper for [Datadog::Statsd#increment](http://www.rubydoc.info/github/DataDog/dogstatsd-ruby/master/Datadog%2FStatsd:increment)

#### decrement(stat, options = {})
Wrapper for [Datadog::Statsd#decrement](http://www.rubydoc.info/github/DataDog/dogstatsd-ruby/master/Datadog%2FStatsd:decrement)

#### time(stat, options = {}, &blk)
Wrapper for [Datadog::Statsd#time](http://www.rubydoc.info/github/DataDog/dogstatsd-ruby/master/Datadog%2FStatsd:time)

#### timing(stat, options = {}, &blk)
Wrapper for [Datadog::Statsd#timing](http://www.rubydoc.info/github/DataDog/dogstatsd-ruby/master/Datadog%2FStatsd:timing)

### Method Instrumentation
Before any method you want to instrument, you just needto add a call to
`instrument`

```ruby
instrument
def omg
 # stuff
end

instrument
def self.omg
 # stuff
end
```

These methods will be instrumented with some default behaviors. By default it
count the number of calls, time the total duration, and capture and register
any exceptions.

By default the following tags are added to any stats call within an
an instrumented method (and down the stack). `method:METHOD_NAME` and
`method_class:CLASS_NAME` the method name is the actual method name, pefixed
with either a `#` or `.` for instance and class method respectivly.

#### Output Instrumentation
By default every method produces a `methods.count` and `methods.timing`

#### Adding more tags
You can append tags to the instrmentation methods by specifying the tag key
as either a array of string, or a proc. The proc will be provided with the
arguments to the method.

__Example__
```ruby
instrument tags: ['foo:bar']
def omg
end

instrument tags: ->(args) { ["arg1:#{args[1]}"] }
def omg
  increment('omg.count')
end
```

Note: Any instrumentation call that occurrs within the method will have the
tags method's tags applied to it. See the docs for `with_tags`

### Testing Support
IATT comes with some helpers to make testing a little easier for RSpec. If you
incldue the module, outbound messages will be intercepted at the transmitter.

First you need to require the helpers in your `spec_helper.rb` with
`require 'instrument_all_the_things/testing/setup'`. This will install the
interceptor, and if RSpec is already required it will add a before filter to
clear the stored metrics on each test. You should also add
`config.include InstrumentAllTheThings::Testing::Aggregators` to your RSpec
config to enable the helpers below.


During a test you can get access to the counters and filtering them using a few
helpers.

* __get_counter(counter_name)__ - gets an object with all calls to a counter with a given name
* __get_timings(timer_name)__ - gets an object with all calls to timers with a given name

#### Working with stats
The following methods can be used to filter or total the stats that have been
transmitted. Each method modifies the object in-place
* __with_tags(*tag_filters)__ - only takes stats that match ALL of the tag
  filters. Each tag filter can be a string for an exact match, or a regular
  expression. Returns `self`
* __values__ - Returns the raw values actually transmitted.
* __total__ - The sum of all values transmitted

__Example__
```ruby
class Foo
  include InstrumentAllTheThings::HelperMethods

  def bar(entries, old_way)
    if old_way
      with_tags('type:old') do
        increment('did.things', entries.length)
      end
    else
      with_tags('type:new') do
        increment('did.things', entries.length)
      end
    end
  end
end

RSpec.describe Foo do
  let(:instance) { Foo.new }

  context "doing things the old way" do
    it "counts the things" do
      expect {
        instance.bar([1,2], true)
      }.to change {
        get_counter('did.things').with_tags('type:old').total
      }.by(2).and.not_to change {
        get_counter('did.things').with_tags('type:new').total
      }.from(nil)
    end
  end
end
```

## Development

After checking out the repo, run `bin/setup` to install dependencies. Then, run `rake spec` to run the tests. You can also run `bin/console` for an interactive prompt that will allow you to experiment.

To install this gem onto your local machine, run `bundle exec rake install`. To release a new version, update the version number in `version.rb`, and then run `bundle exec rake release`, which will create a git tag for the version, push git commits and tags, and push the `.gem` file to [rubygems.org](https://rubygems.org).

## Contributing

Bug reports and pull requests are welcome on GitHub at https://github.com/[USERNAME]/instrument_all_the_things.

Commit message:

Allowing methods to have their name overridden

README.md, after:

# InstrumentAllTheThings

Welcome to your new gem! In this directory, you'll find the files you need to be able to package up your Ruby library into a gem. Put your Ruby code in the file `lib/instrument_all_the_things`. To experiment with that code, run `bin/console` for an interactive prompt.

TODO: Delete this and the text above, and describe your gem

## Installation

Add this line to your application's Gemfile:

```ruby
gem 'instrument_all_the_things'
```

And then execute:

    $ bundle

Or install it yourself as:

    $ gem install instrument_all_the_things

## Usage

### Configuration
Two ENV variables are required to connect InstrumentAllTheThings with DataDog.

1. `DATADOG_HOST` - defaults to localhost
2. `DATADOG_PORT` - defaults to 8125

### Usage in application code
Within your application code, the `InstrumentAllTheThings::HelperMethods` moddule
can be included to provide some helper methods.

```ruby
class SomeClass
  include InstrumentAllTheThings::HelperMethods
end
```

### Instrumentation Helpers
The helpers provided by the HelperMethods module

#### with_tags(*tags, options = {}, &blk)
Any instrumentation method with that block will have those tags appended to it.

Options:
* `except` - an array of strings or regex of active tags to remove from the active tag list

__Example__
```ruby
InstrumentAllTheThings.active_tags += ['foo:bar']

class Foo
  include InstrumentAllTheThings::HelperMethods

  def foo
    with_tags('omg:wassup', 'dude:car?') do
      # Tags are now foo:bar, omg:wassup, dude:car?
      with_tags('baz:nitch', except: [/\Adude:.*/]) do
        # Tags are now foo:bar, omg:wassup, baz:nitch
        with_tags(except: [/\Aomg:.*/]) do
          # Tags are now foo:bar, baz:nitch
        end
        # Tags are back to foo:bar, omg:wassup, baz:nitch
      end
      # Tags are now back to foo:bar, omg:wassup, dude:car?
    end
  end
end
```

#### increment(stat, options = {})
Wrapper for [Datadog::Statsd#increment](http://www.rubydoc.info/github/DataDog/dogstatsd-ruby/master/Datadog%2FStatsd:increment)

#### decrement(stat, options = {})
Wrapper for [Datadog::Statsd#decrement](http://www.rubydoc.info/github/DataDog/dogstatsd-ruby/master/Datadog%2FStatsd:decrement)

#### time(stat, options = {}, &blk)
Wrapper for [Datadog::Statsd#time](http://www.rubydoc.info/github/DataDog/dogstatsd-ruby/master/Datadog%2FStatsd:time)

#### timing(stat, options = {}, &blk)
Wrapper for [Datadog::Statsd#timing](http://www.rubydoc.info/github/DataDog/dogstatsd-ruby/master/Datadog%2FStatsd:timing)

### Method Instrumentation
Before any method you want to instrument, you just needto add a call to
`instrument`

```ruby
instrument
def omg
 # stuff
end

instrument
def self.omg
 # stuff
end
```

These methods will be instrumented with some default behaviors. By default it
count the number of calls, time the total duration, and capture and register
any exceptions.

By default the following tags are added to any stats call within an
an instrumented method (and down the stack). `method:METHOD_NAME` and
`method_class:CLASS_NAME` the method name is the actual method name, pefixed
with either a `#` or `.` for instance and class method respectivly.

#### Output Instrumentation
By default every method produces a `methods.count` and `methods.timing`. If you
would like to provide a custom naming scheme, you can specify the `:as` option.

__Example__
```ruby
instrument as: 'foo.bar.baz'
def foo
end
```

All calls to `foo` will be instrumented as `foo.bar.baz.count` and
`foo.bar.baz.timing`.


#### Adding more tags
You can append tags to the instrmentation methods by specifying the tag key
as either a array of string, or a proc. The proc will be provided with the
arguments to the method.

__Example__
```ruby
instrument tags: ['foo:bar']
def omg
end

instrument tags: ->(args) { ["arg1:#{args[1]}"] }
def omg
  increment('omg.count')
end
```

Note: Any instrumentation call that occurrs within the method will have the
tags method's tags applied to it. See the docs for `with_tags`

#### Exceptoins
If an exception is raised within a method that is instrumented it will be
recorded in `exceptions.count` with all of the method tags defined for that
method. If a custom name is provided via `:as` it will be regsitered as
`custom.name.exceptions.count`

### Testing Support
IATT comes with some helpers to make testing a little easier for RSpec. If you
incldue the module, outbound messages will be intercepted at the transmitter.

First you need to require the helpers in your `spec_helper.rb` with
`require 'instrument_all_the_things/testing/setup'`. This will install the
interceptor, and if RSpec is already required it will add a before filter to
clear the stored metrics on each test. You should also add
`config.include InstrumentAllTheThings::Testing::Aggregators` to your RSpec
config to enable the helpers below.


During a test you can get access to the counters and filtering them using a few
helpers.

* __get_counter(counter_name)__ - gets an object with all calls to a counter with a given name
* __get_timings(timer_name)__ - gets an object with all calls to timers with a given name

#### Working with stats
The following methods can be used to filter or total the stats that have been
transmitted. Each method modifies the object in-place
* __with_tags(*tag_filters)__ - only takes stats that match ALL of the tag
  filters. Each tag filter can be a string for an exact match, or a regular
  expression. Returns `self`
* __values__ - Returns the raw values actually transmitted.
* __total__ - The sum of all values transmitted

__Example__
```ruby
class Foo
  include InstrumentAllTheThings::HelperMethods

  def bar(entries, old_way)
    if old_way
      with_tags('type:old') do
        increment('did.things', entries.length)
      end
    else
      with_tags('type:new') do
        increment('did.things', entries.length)
      end
    end
  end
end

RSpec.describe Foo do
  let(:instance) { Foo.new }

  context "doing things the old way" do
    it "counts the things" do
      expect {
        instance.bar([1,2], true)
      }.to change {
        get_counter('did.things').with_tags('type:old').total
      }.by(2).and.not_to change {
        get_counter('did.things').with_tags('type:new').total
      }.from(nil)
    end
  end
end
```

## Development

After checking out the repo, run `bin/setup` to install dependencies. Then, run `rake spec` to run the tests. You can also run `bin/console` for an interactive prompt that will allow you to experiment.

To install this gem onto your local machine, run `bundle exec rake install`. To release a new version, update the version number in `version.rb`, and then run `bundle exec rake release`, which will create a git tag for the version, push git commits and tags, and push the `.gem` file to [rubygems.org](https://rubygems.org).

## Contributing

Bug reports and pull requests are welcome on GitHub at https://github.com/[USERNAME]/instrument_all_the_things.
